The challenge we face is that the number of conceptualisations (approaches, mental models, paradigm or whatever) for a situation far exceeds the concrete reality of the same situation. In short there are many more 'I think it is a' than 'it is what it is'. 

The decision making is one of arbitrage of the conceptualisations and here Systems Thinking encourages and exploits the richness derived from different perspectives. The technique of ST helps reconcile, rank and reject inappropriate approaches. The choices made needs to be around content not consensus - the most appropriate is not merely the simplest.

The seduction of the simple language, and intrinsic single approach, is an appeal to cut through this richness of perspective which is seldom more correct nor easier. Why should the idea of Systems Thinking which is based on plurality advocate a different perspective everyone except in the choice of approach?

### Ashby Advice on Decision Making

i and ch is made worse by the growing phenomenon of fake news, Ashby who refused to be drawn into a dichotomy described decision making as part knowledge (fact) and part guess 

The fundamental principle of decision on a finite quantity of information may be expressed thus: **Use all that you know to shrink the range of possibilities to their minimum; after that, do as you please**. The development we have today have made the situation both better and worse - better that we have more information, worse that 

### Ashby - Chance Favors the Mind Prepared

> ... Let us assume that the problem is essentially one of selection: of a few students from many applicants, of a draft from a much larger body, or, very generally, of a good decision from a great number of possible decisions. The fundamental discovery of the last 20 years is that all such selection processes are subject to the laws of information theory. The first is that appropriate selection can be based only on information in the requisite quantity, and the second is that information is measurable and finite. It follows that in any real life situation the amount of appropriate selection that can be achieved is also finite. At any given moment, a would-be selection will have available a certain quantity of information and no more. With this quantity he can execute a corresponding quantity of rational, appropriate, meaningful selection. When the information is exhausted, no further rational grounds exist.
> 
> Selection, then, to be rational and defensible, must be based on information. But it often happens in real life that the quantity of information available falls short of the necessary. A thousand students may rationally be reduced to 500 by the information that the college accepts men only, but what are we to do if the college can accept only 50? One would not forget, of course, that more information may be available, perhaps sufficient for the whole selection to be rational; but what if the required information is either not available or could be obtained only at cost that is prohibitive? The fundamental principle of decision on a finite quantity of information may be expressed thus: **Use all that you know to shrink the range of possibilities to their minimum; after that, do as you please**.
> 
> With this rule in mind, we can see why the editorial was unsatisfactory. Its very title: 'Chance, or Human Judgment?" tended to set the reader thinking of the two competitors, mutually exclusive, while the truth is that they are natural complements. In arriving at a decision, human judgment first should prevail; then chance should be used as the necessary supplement to bring the decision to uniqueness ... Modern methods of decision-making use both, chance and human judgment. From this point of view the use of chance is in no way a "denial of rationality." On the contrary, chance is the intelligent man's method of selection when he knows that the quantity of information available to him as selector is less than the quantity of selection demanded from him.