IV. DISCUSSION
 IV. DISCUSSION

The Roman and Byzantine case studies illustrate different outcomes to complexification, and offer different lessons for understanding sustainability. The Roman collapse exemplifies the thesis of this essay, that increasing complexity precedes the availability of energy and subsequently compels increases in its production. The Byzantine collapse and recovery illustrate a different but also important point, which will be discussed later. 

The Roman Empire is a single case study in complexity and problem solving (for others, see Tainter, 1988, 2000, 2002, 2006; Allenetal.,2003),but it is an important and representative one. It illustrates one of the basic processes by which societies increase in complexity. Societies adopt increasing complexity to solve problems, becoming at the same time more costly. In the normal course of economic evolution, this process at some point will produce diminishing returns. Once diminishing returns set in, a problem-solving institution must either find new resources to continue the activity, or fund the activity by reducing the share of resources available to other economic sectors. The latter is likely to produce economic contraction, popular discontent, and eventual collapse. This was the fate of the Western Roman Empire. 

This understanding of complexity and resources has implications for our contemporary discussions of energy and sustain ability. Both popular and academic discourse on sustainability commonly make the following assumptions: that (a) future sustainability requires that industrial societies consume a lower quantity of resources than is now the case (e.g., Brown, 2008; Caldararo, 2004; Heinberg, 2004), and (b) sustainability will result automatically if we do so. Sustainability emerges, in this view, as a passive consequence of consuming less. Thus sustainability efforts are commonly focused on reducing consumption through voluntary or enforced conservation, perhaps involving simplification, and/or through improvements in technical efficiencies. 

The common perspective on sustainability follows logically from the progressivist view that resources precede and facilitate innovations that increase complexity. Complexity, in this view, is a voluntary matter. Human societies became more complex by choice rather than necessity. By this reasoning, we should be able to choose to forego complexity and the resource consumption that it entails. Progressivism leads to the notion that societies can deliberately reduce their consumption of resources and thus achieve sustainability. Regrettably, we know that progressivism is a flawed argument, failing to provide an accurate account of history. 

The fact that complexity and costliness increase through mundane problem solving suggests a different conclusion with a startling implication: Contrary to what is typically advocated as the route to sustainability, it is usually not possible for a society to reduce its consumption of resources voluntarily over the long term. To the contrary, as problems great and small inevitably arise, addressing these problems requires complexity and re source consumption to increase. Historically, as illustrated by the Roman Empire and other cases (Tainter, 1988, 2000, 2002, 2006; Allen et al.,2003),this has commonly been the case. 

The Byzantine collapse becomes important at this point. It is the only case of which I am aware in which a large, complex society systematically simplified, and reduced thereby its consumption of resources. While this case shows that societies can reduce resource consumption and thrive, it offers no hope that this can be done commonly. In the Byzantine case simplification was forced, made necessary by a gross insufficiency of revenues. The Byzantines undertook simplification and conservation because, to use a colloquial expression, their backs were to the wall. The empire had no choice. The Byzantine simplification was also temporary. As Byzantine finances recovered, emperors again expanded the size and complexity of their armed forces (McGeer, 1995; Treadgold, 1995). The Byzantine chronicler Anna Comnena, daughter of emperor Alexius I (1081–1118), described her father’s marching army as like a moving city (Haldon, 1999). 

Many students of sustainability will find it a disturbing conclusion that long-term conservation is not possible, contravening as it does so many assumptions about future sustainability. Naturally we must ask: are there alternatives to this process? Can we find a way out of this dilemma? Regrettably, as Boulding observed, no simple solutions are evident.

Consider some of the approaches commonly advocated:

1. ***Voluntarily Reduce Resource Consumption***. While this may work for a time, its longevity as a strategy is constrained by the factors discussed in this essay: Societies increase in complexity to solve problems, becoming more costly in the process. Resource production must subsequently increase to fund the increased complexity. To implement voluntary conservation long term would require that a society be either uniquely lucky in not being challenged by problems, or that it not addresses the problems that confront it. The latter strategy would at best reduce the legitimacy of the problem-solving institution, and at worst lead to its demise. I will not address in depth the question whether long-term voluntary conservation is possible at the level of individuals and households. I am confident that usually it is not, that humans will not ordinarily forego affordable consumption of things they desire on the basis of abstract projections about the future. I raise the possibility of voluntary conservation only because of its perennial popularity. There are societies that seem to incorporate an ethic of conservation. Japan, as described by Caldararo (2004), may be such a society. Caldararo argues that Japan participates in the system of industrial nations in its own way: low fertility, comparatively low consumption, high savings, acceptance of high prices, and tolerance of institutions that are economically in efficient but socially rational. “Japan,” Caldararo believes, “is building a sustainable economy for the 21st century” (2004). Yet even if Caldararo’s assessment is accurate, such a case does not contravene the arguments presented here. Even in societies that do voluntarily consume less than they could, problem solving must in time cause complexity, costliness, and resource consumption to grow. These things may grow from a smaller base, but the fundamental process of increasing complexity remains unaltered.

2. ***Employ the Price Mechanism to Control Resource Consumption***. This is currently the laissez-faire strategy of industrialized nations. Since humans don’t commonly forego affordable consumption of desired goods and services, economists consider it more effective than voluntary conservation. Both approaches, however, lead eventually to the same outcome: As problems arise, resource consumption must increase at the societal level even if consumers as individuals purchase less.

3. ***Ration Resources***. Because of its unpopularity, rationing is possible in democracies only for clear, short-term emergencies. This is illustrated by the reactions to rationing in England and the United States during World War II. Moreover, rationed resources may become needed to solve societal problems, belying any attempt to conserve through rationing. Something like this can be seen in the fiscal stimulus programs enacted in late 2008 and early 2009.

4. ***Reduce Population***. While this would reduce aggregate resource consumption temporarily, as a long-term strategy it has the same fatal flaw as the first two: Problems will emerge that require solutions, and those solutions will compel resource production to grow.

5. ***Hope for Technological Solutions***. I sometimes call this a faith-based approach to our future. We members of industrialized societies are socialized to believe that we can always find a technological solution to resource problems. Technology, within the framework of this belief, will presumably allow us continually to reduce our resource consumption per unit of material well-being. Conventional economics teaches that to bring this about we need only the price mechanism and unfettered markets.

Consider, for example, the following statements:

• *No society can escape the general limits of its resources, but no innovative society need accept Malthusian diminishing returns (Barnett and Morse, 1963),*

• *All observers of energy seem to agree that various energy alternatives are virtually inexhaustible (Gordon, 1981),*

• *By allocation of resources to R&D, we may deny the Malthusian hypothesis and prevent the conclusion of the doomsday models (Sato and Suzawa, 1983).*

Our society’s belief in technical solutions is deeply ingrained. 

The flaw here was pointed out by Jevons (1866), as noted above: as technological improvements reduce the cost of using a resource, total consumption will eventually increase. The Jevons Paradox (also known as the Rebound Effect) is widely in effect (Polimeni et al.,2008), among economic levels ranging from nations to households and individuals, including in many sectors of daily life (Tainter, 2008). 

Thus, conventional solutions to problems of resource consumption can only be effective for short periods of time. Over the long term, problem solving compels societies to grow in complexity and increase consumption. Because of this it is useful to think of sustainability in the metaphor of an athletic game: it is possible to “lose”—that is, to become unsustainable, as happened to the Western Roman Empire. But the converse does not hold. Because we continually confront challenges, there is no point at which a society has “won”—become sustainable in perpetuity, or at least for a very long time. Success, rather, consists of remaining in the game. 

What can societies do when faced with increasing complexity, increasing costs, and diminishing returns in problem solving? There appear to be seven possible strategies, all of which are effective only for a time (Tainter, 2006). These are not sequential steps, nor are they mutually exclusive. They are simply ideas that can work alone or in combination. ***Some of these strategies would clearly have only short-term effects, while others may be effective for longer***. The first strategy, however, is essential in all long-term efforts toward sustainability.

1. ***Be aware***. Complexity is most insidious when the participants in an institution are unaware of what causes it. Managers of problem-solving institutions gain an advantage by understanding how complexity develops, and its long-term consequences. It is important to understand that unsustainable complexity may emerge over periods of time stretching from years to millennia, and that cumulative costs bring the greatest problems.

2. ***Don’t solve the problem***. This option is deceptively simple. As obvious as it seems, not solving problems is a strategy that is rarely adopted. The world view of Western industrial societies is that ingenuity and incentives can solve all problems. Ignorance of complexity, combined with the fact that the cost of solving problems is often deferred or spread thinly, reinforces our problem-solving inclination. Yet often we do choose not to solve problems, either because of their cost or because of competing priorities. Appropriators and managers do this routinely.

3. ***Accept and pay the cost of complexity***. This is a common strategy, perhaps the most common in coping with complexity. It too is deceptively simple. Governments are often tempted to pay the cost of problem solving by increasing taxes, which reduces the share of national income available to other economic sectors. Businesses may do the same by increasing prices. The problem comes when taxpayers and consumers rebel, or when a firm’s competitors offer a similar product at a lower cost.

4. ***Find subsidies to pay costs***. This has been the strategy of modern industrial economies, which have employed the subsidies of fossil and nuclear energy to support our unprecedented levels of complexity. As seen since the adoption of coal (Wilkinson, 1973), the right subsidies can sustain complex problem solving for centuries. Anxiety over future energy is not just about maintaining a standard of living. It also concerns our future problem-solving abilities.

5. ***Shift or defer costs***. This is one of the most common ways to pay for complexity. Budget deficits, currency devaluation, and externalizing costs exemplify this principle in practice. This was the strategy of the Roman Empire in debasing its currency, which shifted to the future the costs of containing current crises. Governments before the Roman Empire also practiced this subterfuge, as have many since. As seen in the case of the Romans, it is a strategy that can work only for a time. When it is no longer feasible, the economic repercussions may be far worse than if costs had never been deferred.

6. ***Connect costs and benefits***. If one adopts the explicit goal of controlling complexity, costs and benefits must be connected so explicitly that the tendency for complexity to grow can be constrained by its costs. In an institution this means that information about the cost of complexity must flow accurately and effectively. Yet in a hierarchical institution, the flow of information from the bottom to the top is frequently inaccurate and ineffective (McIntosh et al., 2000). Thus the managers of an institution are often poorly informed about the cost of complexity and feel free to deploy more.

7. ***Recalibrate or revolutionize the activity***. This involves a fundamental change in how costs and benefits are connected, and is potentially the most far-reaching technique for coping with complexity. The strategy may involve both new resources and new types of complexity that lower costs, combined with positive feedback among new elements that amplifies benefits and produces growth.

As noted above, true revolutions of this sort are rare, so much so that we recognize them in retrospect with a term signifying a new era: the Agricultural Revolution and the Industrial Revolution. Today’s Information Revolution may be another such case. Fundamental changes of this sort depend on opportunities for positive feedback, where elements reinforce each other. For example, Watt’s steam engine facilitated the mining of coal by improving pumping water from mines. Cheaper coal meant more steam engines could be built and put to use, facilitating even cheaper coal (Wilkinson, 1973). Put a steam engine on rails and both coal and other products can be distributed better to consumers. Combine coal, steam engines, and railroads, and we had most of the components of the Industrial Revolution, all mutually reinforcing each other. The economic system became more complex, but the complexity involved new elements, connections, and subsidies that produced increasing returns. 

The transformation of the U.S. military since the 1970s provides a more recent example. So profound is this transformation that it is recognized by its own acronym: RMA, the revolution in military affairs. The revolution involves extensive reliance on information technology, as well as the integration of hardware, software, and personnel. Weapons platforms are just part of this revolution, since weapons now depend on integration with sensors, satellites, software, and command systems (Paarlberg, 2004). This is a military that is vastly more complex than ever before. That complexity is of course costly, but the benefits include both greater effectiveness and significant cost savings. Being able to pinpoint targets means less waste of ordinance, less need for large numbers of weapons platforms, and a need for fewer people. 

The fact that such revolutions do occur gives hope that a way out of our current dilemma may be found. Yet complex systems at the societal level cannot be designed. They emerge on their own or they don’t. To rely on some hoped-for revolution involving innovation, energy, and positive feedback is, like relying on technological innovation, a faith-based approach to our future.