I know the Theory of Constraints well having read Goldratt's original works and then followed the development by H William Dettmer.

My first observation would start with the history of TOC and the Goal. At the time Eli was trying to sell optimisation software and, as a result, produced the Goal as a way of explaining the purpose of the software. The central parable of the Goal - the scout group - emphasises the nature of the weakest link and artificially constrains the group (system) to be constrained to the slowest. It is a good powerful parable and illustrates his Drum-Buffer-Rope paradigm.

Taken at first sight then the approach is applicable to 'Systems' with a chain structure amendable to a Root Cause Analysis. As such I find other sources, such as Don Reinertsen and especially Managing the Design Factory, better on the often paradoxical properties of queues and buffers. (Reinertsen also includes examples where 'The Goal' is not singly defined or even unavailable - such as R&D)

Where TOC thinking has merit is in the 'catch-all' nature of the findings. Developed in a manufacturing domain the focus on TOC also, accidentally, addresses the detrimental 'secondary effects' of unnecessary buffers and the waste of capital, the congestion of the production line with buffer stock, the coordination costs of complex handovers etc. All of this is the 'meat and drink' of manufacturing disciplines such as Just In Time manufacturing.

In The Goal one of the 'secondary effects' is the morale and motivation of the slowest scout, seeing the faster colleagues disappear over the horizon is detrimental to performance of the rate determining team members. Similarly in any managerial activities whose performance depends on 'human factors' a TOC regime avoids many of the debilitation factors on performance - such as boredom of waiting, multi-tasking and distraction, over-thinking, over-elaboration of a Minimum Viable Product and obstinacy in digging in to an original idea. If the situation is dynamic and requirements are changing the fragility of the process to historic commitments produces effects which are significant. As a side effect TOC thinking will help alleviate these Human Factors downsides even if in these Human systems there is no direct causality (of physical buffers etc).

I'm not sure if these - accidental secondary effects - explain or expand your thinking about the universality of the approach.

If you go beyond Goldratt's original work and the more recent Logical Thinking Processes / Reality Tree Concepts here TOC widens the thinking beyond a narrow focus on point optimisation towards a wider Systems view. Again a good way forward but not the only approach (for example Systems Thinking) and restricted to systems with a clear line of sight between cause and effect. 